## Exercise1.1 

When a user enters an URL in the browser, how does the browser fetch the desired result ?

1. browser looks up IP address of domain name.
2. initiates TCP connection with hostname.
3. after connction is astablished sends HTTP request.
4. server processes the request and sends back the response.
5. browser displays the response.

- from IP lookup to receiving response from server step is completed in networking component. from browser dev tools we can monitor this network calls, we can see time for diffrent process as here shown in image.

[browser netwrok call image](assets/networkCall.png)
- broser maps DNS address to IP address and initiates TCP connection with server. after connection is established browser sends HTTP request to server. and then wait for response from server side.

- server response can be of diffrent type, it can be identified by request header Content-Type or from browser dev tools.

- browser inspects this response and identifies HTML response to display.

=> browser rendering:
- browser has rendering engine to process this response data and render it. diffrent browser uses diffrent rendering engine. like firefox uses Gekgo, opera and chrom uses Blink, etc. 
- engine first parse html code and do tokenization, engine identifies and understands HTML tags. Now after creating tokens this token are converted in Nodes and Nodes are incorporeted in DOM tree.
- When it encounters Link tag it will request css files and will do similar process and create CSS object tree.
- Now we got DOM and CSSOM and from this two tree browser will create render tree which reads both of this trees and creates render tree.
- after render tree is contructed browser will start layout process, it will calculate the size and position of each object(Node) in render tree with browser viewport.
- lastly now that each element is computed browser paints the Nodes from render tree to the screen.

- everyting is perfetcly fine until Javascript comes into picture. so when browser encounters script tag it halts DOM tree creating process until script executes becose it can ulter DOM tree. (thsts why script tag position matters)
- also while browser encounters script tag and CSSOM tree is not completed then script execution will be halted until CSSOM is done.
- so priority of script will be CSS > JS > HTML.


- to see this process firefox browser dev tools has profiler which captures browser activity and we can analyse from captured stack.

[browser rendering stack from profiler](assets/rendering.png);
[browser rendering and painting stack from profiler](assets/renderingPainting.png);




resorce [https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/mobile/what-happens-when-you-type-a-url-into-your-browser/]
resorce [https://blog.logrocket.com/how-browser-rendering-works-behind-scenes/]